1. npm init -y
to initialise node packages and automatically create node.js with default value
2. wht is dependency
Yes, a dependency is essentially a library/package that your project depends on to work. anything that ur application need when it runs
eg: nodemon is a devdependency , as it is need only for development for for production
3.dependencies
express	Creates the web server and API routes.
mongoose	Connects Node.js to MongoDB and provides schemas/models.
dotenv	Loads environment variables from a .env file.
bcrypt	Hashes passwords securely before storing them.
jsonwebtoken	Creates and verifies JWT tokens for authentication.
cors	Allows frontend apps from other origins/domains to call your API.
multer	Handles file uploads (multipart/form-data).
sharp	Processes images (resize, compress, crop, convert formats).
cloudinary	Uploads and stores images/videos in Cloudinary cloud storage.

4. The -D means they are installed as devDependencies because they're mainly needed during development and compilation.
5. @types/express
npm install -D @types/express

Purpose: Type definitions for Express.(similarly others)
6.npx tsc --init
Creates a tsconfig.json file in your project.

Think of tsconfig.json as the configuration file for TypeScript. It tells the TypeScript compiler (tsc) how to convert your .ts files into JavaScript.
7. config/ : configuration files-> fo rconnection , setup , env configuration

8. controllers. : business logic for routes(actual jo krna h vo code
)
Route receives request
        ↓
Controller does the work
        ↓
Response returned
9 . middleware/ : functions that run before the controleer -> auth , error handling , upload , request validation
10 .models. : schemas and models 
11. roues/ : api endpoint
12. types/ : custom typescript types and interfaces
13. utils/ : reusable helper functions
14. app.ts : configuration and config the express server
15. server.ts : crates the server
16. Those are Git warnings, not errors. Your project will still work.
17. Processe.exit(1)
18.npm install -D @types/express
  installs TypeScript typings for the Express library, allowing TypeScript to understand Express APIs and provide:
  Autocomplete
  Type checking 
  Better editor support
  19. jwt.sign() is used to create a JSON Web Token (JWT).

What does the token hold?

The token contains the payload you pass as the first argument to jwt.sign().

In the example above, the payload is:

{
  user: {
    id: "12345",
    username: "alice"
  }
}

Along with standard JWT metadata such as:

iat (issued at)
exp (expiration time, if specified)
JWT Structure


A JWT has three parts:

header.payload.signature
jwt.sign(payload, secret, options)

For example:

eyJhbGciOiJIUzI1NiJ9.
eyJ1c2VyIjp7ImlkIjoiMTIzNDUiLCJ1c2VybmFtZSI6ImFsaWNlIn19.
abc123...
Header: algorithm information
Payload: your data (id, username, etc.)
Signature: verifies the token hasn't been tampered with
Important

The payload is not encrypted by default—it's only encoded (Base64URL). Anyone who gets the token can decode and read the payload.

So don't put sensitive information like:

{
  password: "secret",
  creditCard: "1234..."
}

Instead, store only things needed to identify the user:

{
  user: {
    id: user._id
  }
}

Then, when the user makes a request, you verify the token:

const decoded = jwt.verify(token, process.env.JWT_SECRET);

console.log(decoded.user.id);
19 . because of ye timestamp- createdAt , updatedAt aa jata hai vrna manually krnapdhta



